There are many definitions of social capital which can lead to uncertainty about what it is and how to measure it. ONS defines social capital as "...networks together with shared norms, values and understandings that facilitate co-operation within or among groups..." (OECD, 2001:41). It is measuring social capital using a framework for analysis based on five dimensions: social participation, civic participation, reciprocity and trust, social networks and social support and views of the local area.
Standard quantitative measures of social capital indicate that young people are less likely to participate in social and civic activities. Young people are less likely to vote, less likely to be involved in their local community and less likely to undertake formal voluntary work.
However, qualitative research indicates that young people have higher levels of social capital compared to the standard quantitative indicators. This may be because the social capital indicators used on surveys are not relevant to young people.
These narrow approaches to the measurement and conceptualisation of social capital mean that young people's civic and social participation is underestimated, and that young people are perceived only as consumers and not producers of social capital.
(Young people and Social Capital, Elizabeth Whiting and Rosalyn Harper Office for National Statistics December 2003)

Their findings show that many forms of social capital highlighted in the literature as having beneficial consequences for communities are not related to homicide rates. Two dimensions of social capital, social trust and social activism, do exhibit significant associations with homicide rates, net of other influences. However, in the latter case, the relationship is positive, and in both cases, simultaneous equation models suggest that these dimensions of social capital are consequences as well as causes of homicide. The results underscore the importance of examining the different dimensions of social capital and assessing their reciprocal relationships with homicide and other social outcomes.
Nevertheless, the varied, murky, elusive, and even circular meanings of the concept give it great analytical flexibility and multiply its empirical applica- tions.
The most general forms of social capi- tal are trust and social participation, which form, in Putnam’s (2000:137) words, “a coherent syn- drome” within which the “causal arrows are .|.|. as tangled as well-tossed spaghetti.” Trust assumes two basic forms for Putnam: “bonding” trust, which refers to trust in concrete others (friends, coworkers, family, neighbors), and “bridging” trust, which extends beyond imme- diate social circles to more distant others with whom individuals have no direct ties (see also Yamigishi, Cook, and Watabe 1998). In related usage, Putnam (2000) refers to the two forms of trust as “thick” and “thin,” respectively. Elsewhere, Putnam extends this distinction beyond trust and refers to bonding and bridg- ing social capital.
Putnam (2000) subdivides the social partic- ipation component of social capital into politi- cal participation, civic participation, religious participation, workplace connections, informal social ties, and philanthropy, altruism, and volunteering. Among the possible forms of politi- cal participation, Putnam (2000:31–47, 153) emphasizes voting; political knowledge and interest; party identification; involvement in campaigns; attendance at a political rally, speech, or public meeting; committee service for a local organization; participation in social movements; and political protest. Some of these forms of political engagement bleed into civic participation, which entails joining and attend- ing meetings of nonpolitical voluntary associ- ations, such as the Elks, Knights of Columbus, PTAs, and Boys and Girls Clubs of America (pp. 48–64). Religious participation includes church membership and attendance, as well as involve- ment in church-related programs and activities, such as study groups, charities, and “socials” (pp. 65–79).
Putnam does rec- ognize that not all forms of social capital produce positive outcomes. Some kinds of bonding social capital, in particular, are asso- ciated with hostility to outsiders and may impede the flow of information that accompa- nies bridging social capital (Putnam 2000:362)
One of the pernicious consequences of declin- ing social capital in the United States, accord- ing to Putnam, is increased crime.
He concludes that crime and social capital are directly linked: “Higher levels of social capital, all else being equal, translate into lower levels of crime” (p. 308).
Putnam’s explanation of the connection between social capital and crime is rooted most directly in social disorganization theory (Bursik 1988; Sampson and Groves 1989; Shaw and McKay 1969). In the classic formulation, dis- organized communities are characterized by high rates of economic deprivation, residential instability, and population heterogeneity (Shaw and McKay 1969). These conditions impede the development of both primary and second- ary social networks among residents and between communities, which in turn reduces a community’s capacity to exert social control, especially over the behavior of youth (Bursik and Grasmick 1993; Sampson and Groves 1989). Drawing on the logic of social disor- ganization theory, Putnam argues that social networks form the infrastructure of social cap- ital. This allows for “the reinforcement of pos- itive standards for youth,” offering them “access to mentors, role models, educational sponsors, and job contacts outside the neighborhood,” .|.|. “providing emotional and financial support for individuals,” and supplying “political leverage and volunteers for community institutions” (Putnam 2000:312). Severed networks and depleted social capital, in contrast, leave “kids to their own devices,” increasing the chances that they will act on “short-sighted or self-destruc- tive impulses” (p. 312). In addition, destructive
forms of bonding social capital, such as youth gangs, may emerge in response to the general depletion of other forms of bonding and bridg- ing social capital. The implications for crime are clear: “Young people rob and steal not only because they are poor, but also because adult networks and institutions have broken down” (p. 314).
Crime is one of the most persistently “disor- ganizing” conditions confronting any commu- nity. The possibility that it leads to social activism while undermining social trust and perhaps other dimensions of social capital only underscores its theoretical importance. Classical disorganization theory was updated and ampli- fied in the late 20th century by the incorpora- tion of explicit attention to varying types and loci of social controls—from intimate relations with family and friends to political ties between neighborhoods and government officials—that regulate community crime rates (Bursik and Grasmick 1993). A further theoretical move is now needed that reconceptualizes crime as both an outcome and source of social disorganization (see also Bellair 1997). The criticism of earlier formulations of disorganization theory as cir- cular because they tended to confound crime with its putative causes led to alterations in the theory that place less emphasis on crime as a disorganizing community process in its own right (Bursik 1988). Social disorganization the- ory now requires renewed attention to the processes through which crime reproduces itself by impeding the development of certain forms of social capital that inhibit crime, and by stim- ulating the growth of those forms of social cap- ital that are conducive to crime
(Dimensions of Social Capital and Rates of Criminal Homicide
Steven F. Messner, Eric P. Baumer and Richard Rosenfeld American Sociological Review 2004 69: 882
DOI: 10.1177/000312240406900607)

Criminal behaviour depends not only on the incentives facing the individual but also on the behaviour of peers or others surrounding the individual. In case of the same opportunity and expected returns from crime, an individual is less likely to commit crime if his peers and the community he belongs to punish deviant behaviour. If one individual decides not to commit crime, it is less likely that others will do so, which creates an external effect of one person’s behaviour on the others. Informal social control by which citizens themselves achieve social order increases the level of well-being in a community
This in turn raises the level of trust among citizens, altruistic behaviour (e.g., involvement in charity and voluntary contributions or donations) and participation in activities that serve the community at a more abstract level (e.g., voting). Although informal social control is often a response to unusual behaviour, it is not the same as formal regulation and it should not be equated with formal institutions that are designed to prevent and punish crime, such as the police and courts. It rather refers to the ability of groups to realise collective goals and, in our setting, to live in places free of crime.
First, social capital is an increasing function of participation in civic life. For instance, higher voter turnout and more voluntary donations to charity contribute to a community’s social capital. Voter turnout is hypothesized to capture civic involvement and participation in community decision making. This indicator is also used by Putnam (1993, 1995), Rosen- feld, Messner, and Baumer (2001) and Gatti, Tremblay, and Larocque (2003). Voluntary contributions in money terms are supposed to capture the strength of intermediate social structures such as charities, clubs and churches and could be employed as another indicator that measures the presence of social capital. We use a city’s voter turnout rate and its monetary contribution per household to charity as indicators for social capital.
Second, social capital is higher when people care more for each other or are more altruistic. To measure this dimension of social capital, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) suggest to use voluntary blood donations as an indicator for social capital. Although charity and blood seems to measure similar phenomena there is one particular difference. Experimental research reports that voluntary contributions may incorporate elements of warm glow (e.g., Andreoni, 1995) and reciprocity at the same time. For instance, most charity organizations send or give small gifts (pens, postcards, etc.) and it has been shown that the contributions increase with the size of the gift (Falk, 2004). However monetary compensations for donating blood may even crowd out blood donation as suggested by Titmuss (1970) and recent studies have shown that this could well be the case (e.g., Mellstrom and Johannesson, 2008). In the Netherlands there is no monetary compensation of any kind for donating blood, so we suggest that blood donation captures a pure warm glow effect. We use voluntary blood donations per capita as a measure of social capital.
Third, security and trust increase the stock of social capital. When there is more con- formist behaviour, more respect for each other and when norms are institutionalized, the level of social capital is higher. Trust has been identified as a source of social capital. Economists defined the concept in a rather lax way, as an optimistic expectation regarding other agents behaviour (Fafchamps, 2004). Both sociologists and economists have benefited
from the survey-based ‘generalized trust’ indicator as a proxy to social capital, which mea- sures the degree of opportunistic behaviour and as an alternative indicator to social relations in general (e.g., Putnam, 1995; Knack and Keefer, 1997; Zak and Knack, 2001; Rosenfeld, Messner, and Baumer, 2001; Messner, Baumer, and Rosenfeld, 2004). The trust indicator is found to be highly correlated with other measures of social capital such as memberships to associations, extent of friendship and neighbourhood networks and voting (Putnam, 1995).6 We use a generalized trust index and trust in the police as indicators for social capital.
Finally, informal controls and the extent of informal contacts and acquaintances in- crease social capital. So far our indicators assume to measure the presence of social capital. However, the absence of social capital can be measured by using measures of population heterogeneity and family structure. First, the literature on disadvantaged youth and juve- nile crime suggests that most criminals come from single-parent households (e.g., Case and Katz, 1991). Social capital in single-parent households is supposed to be low because of the fact that they lack a second parent and because they change residence frequently. It has been shown that single-parenthood has a negative impact on various outcomes, such as educational attainment, juvenile crime and teenage pregnancy, affecting children’s social development (e.g., McLanahan and Sandefur, 1994; Parcel and Menaghan, 1994). Second, population heterogeneity is an important factor that affects social capital and trust as it breaks closure. We use divorce rates and the percentage of foreigners as indicators of (lack of) informal control and population heterogeneity.
Studies of the social environmental characteristics of crime have shown that there exists a lot of heterogeneity. Disadvantaged neighbourhoods and communities are not equally plagued by high crime rates. Sampson and Groves (1988) have developed a theory of social organization in which communities are empowered through their trust in each other to take actionagainstcrimeandtojoinwithformalcontrol,suchasthepolice.7 Consistentwiththis theory, Sampson, Raudenbush, and Earls (1997) report significantly lower crime levels and self-reports of victimization in neighbourhoods characterized by social or collective efficacy in their study of informal social organization and violent crime in Chicago. Similarly, Bursik and Grasmick (1993) argue that the effectiveness of law enforcement and public control is higherincommunitieswithextensivecivicengagement.8 Strongattachmentandinvolvement in community matters also leads to strong social bonds by which conflicts are resolved in a more peaceful way compared to communities with weak social bonds (e.g., Hirschi, 1969). Hence, the cost of conflict resolution decreases and more conflicts will be solved.
Communities are stronger when there is lower population turnover and density, because turnover and density negatively affect the ability to know others and to observe and intervene in trouble making activities. Glaeser and Sacerdote (1999) explain why there is more crime in larger cities, and find that larger communities have a more transient and anonymous character, which reduces social cohesion. This makes it harder to enforce social sanctions, which reduces the cost of crime and in the end results in more crime. Similarly, Williams and Sickles (2002) find that by being caught an individual risks to loose the utility generating social capital (loss of reputation and job, divorce etc.). This means that the more social capital an individual possesses the higher the expected cost of committing crime, which reduces the probability to engage in criminal activities. So, given the probability of being caught and formal control, higher levels of social capital seem to reduce crime.
When people know each other better, they are also more likely to participate in com- munity organizational life. This is expressed in participation in voluntary organizations and charity (e.g., Putnam, 1993) and support. The opposite is true for disadvantaged families and disadvantaged neighbourhoods in which deprivation of any kind feeds further depri- vation through mechanisms of social interactions and peer effects such as learning effects, imitation and taking the peers as a role model (e.g., Case and Katz, 1991; Manski, 2000; Evans, Wallace, and Schwab, 1992). Individuals who belong to these families are more likely to be unemployed, have low incomes and education and have personal problems. In most cases divorce rates are higher and families are single-parent families headed by women. They are also more likely to live in dense areas with a heterogeneous population and more likely to change residence. Hence, disadvantaged families and persons invest and participate less in the social community they belong to.
An important issue is that most research on social capital struggles with causality. In this research, it could be the case that higher crime rates result in out-migration and constrain positive social interactions. It might also be the case that criminal activity erodes social cap- ital because it engages individuals in crime networks and keeps them away from educational and occupational opportunities. We argue that social capital is a positive sum and founded by historical institutions. Institutions promoting the formation of social capital in the past are positively correlated with current levels of social capital. Finally, higher levels of social capital now, result in lower crime rates.
We apply an instrumental variable strategy in which we instrument a city’s current social capital with its past level education, population heterogeneity and religiosity. Recent studies have shown the validity of such an approach (Tabellini, 2005; Ak ̧comak and ter Weel, 2006). We argue that population heterogeneity, the contribution of religiosity to human and social capital investments, and education in the past contribute to the formation of a city’s social capital, hence shape current social capital.
If social capital is an asset paving the way to community governance (Bowles and Gintis, 2002) or to achieve goals that could be not be achieved or could be achieved only at an higher cost (Coleman, 1988), then any factor that would lead to disorganization and dis-attachment in the community would eventually reduce social capital. Population heterogeneity is such a factor that may trigger dis-attachment as higher levels of heterogeneity would break closure, reduce acquaintance among residents and may result in lower trust among members of the community (e.g., Rose and Clear, 1998; Rosenfeld, Messner, and Baumer, 2001). The effects of racial and/or ethnic heterogeneity on socio-economic outcomes are well documented in the literature. It is shown that heterogeneity has an effect on corruption (Mauro, 1995), rent seeking and low educational attainment (Easterly and Levine, 1997), and lower provision of public goods (Goldin and Katz, 1999). However, our argument in this paper is that ethnic and religious heterogeneity may result in circumstances where formal and/or informal institutions are not binding. Therefore, our argument is more in line with the literature that links heterogeneity to social capital in the wider sense. For instance, both Easterly and Levine (1997) and Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) argue that ethnic fragmentation may increase polarization in a community and create difficulty in the provision of public goods such as public education, libraries, and sewer systems. In a similar vein Alesina and La Ferrara (2000) argue that racial composition affects the degree in participation in social activities. Zak and Knack (2001) and Rupasingha, Goetz, and Freshwater (2002) also show that higher levels of ethnic diversity may result in less trusting societies.
We argue that Protestant belief may have a dual effect on the formation of social capital, which is beyond simply saying that being more religious is associated with higher social capital. First, Beyerlein and Hipp (2005) differentiate between bonding and bridging social capital and argue that groups characterized by bonding social capital are not effective in creating an environment of informal social control to deal with the threat of crime, whereas groups with extensive bridging social capital are more effective in creating such foundations.9 The results show that crime rates are lower in societies with higher levels of bridging social capital. Given this finding that mainline Protestants are more likely to be involved in community wide volunteering, which in turn refers to higher levels of social capital, we argue that communities where more Protestants reside are characterized by a certain environment and ‘ethic’ to paraphrase Max Weber, in which social capital may nurture. This view stresses the institutional aspect of Protestantism. A second link is the human capital aspect (Becker and Woessmann, 2007). The argument here is that Protestant instructions to read the Bible in ones own language and the support for universal schooling boosted the literacy levels early on and hence created human capital as a side effect. Previous research by Coleman (1988) and Goldin and Katz (1999) helps to explain differences in human capital by relating it to historical differences in social capital. 10
The interaction between human and social capital is well documented in the literature (e.g., Coleman, 1988; Goldin and Katz, 1999). Here we base our argument on the fact that human capital affects social capital with a lag. For instance, Goldin and Katz (1999) show that high school movement in the 1930s in various states in the U.S affects current levels of social capital. Recent analyses by Tabellini (2005) and Ak ̧comak and ter Weel (2006) support this finding. They show that for different samples of European regions literacy rates in 1880s do have an impact on current levels of social capital and on a set of cultural indicators. The idea here is that education builds human and social capital at the same time. As shown by Gradstein and Justman (2000, 2002) education affects social capital because education is an important socializing instrument as it builds common norms and facilitates interaction between community members who might be different along cultural, religious or ethnic lines.
(The Impact of Social Capital on Crime: Evidence from the Netherlands
İ. Semih Akçomak
Maastricht University, UNU-MERIT
Bas ter Weel
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, UNU-MERIT, Maastricht University and IZA
Discussion Paper No. 3603 July 2008
IZA)

Crime and the fear it generates are among the most important determinants of individual welfare and of the expected returns to many economic activities. It is both intuitive and confirmed by recent theoretical literature that individual choices of crime participation may be significantly affected by the presence of civic norms and associational networks. Civic norms may attach guilt and shame to criminal behavior, thus increasing its opportunity cost. Associational networks may increase returns to noncriminal activities and raise detection probabilities, but they may also work as communication channels for criminals and may offer official cover to criminal activities. Thus, it is not a priori clear whether the empirical correlation between crime rates and civic norms and associational networks should be expected to be positive or negative and whether it reflects a causal link, in what direction, and with what implications for anticrime policy. Yet such questions have received little attention, particularly by economists. This is especially surprising in light of the recent economic literature on the micro- effects on crime of some forms of social interaction, such as peer effects, neigh- borhood effects, family background effects, and so on, and, more important, in light of the increasing relevance in the economic debate on the concept of social capital, often conceived in terms of social norms and networks that favor co- ordination and cooperation.
Starting from the seminal work by Putnam (1993) on the role of social capital for well-functioning government, several contributions in this literature have focused on Italian data.1 This is due to the fact that Italy displays large and persistent provincial disparities in social and economic characteristics in spite of having common policies, institutions, laws, justice system, and school system; having police forces organized at national level; and being ethnically and reli- giously quite homogeneous. Thus, changes in these factors are not responsible for socioeconomic differences across Italian provinces, and this in turn sub- stantially reduces the omitted-variable problems affecting many cross-country studies.
Several studies, from Knack and Keefer (1997) to Bjørnskov (2006), find empirically that social capital is best described as a collection of three main dimensions, namely, generalized trust, civic norms, and associational networks, and that these dimensions have different effects on economic outcomes. Since our aim is to study the latter two dimensions, we separately consider provincial- level measures of cultural and recreational associations, voluntary associations, voter turnout at referenda, and blood donations. To account for criminal net- works, we also include a measure of criminal association. In our estimates we control for other major socioeconomic determinants of crime rate, such as in- come, unemployment rate, education, urbanization rate, and share of youth.Moreover, to account for provincial differences in the efficiency of the national justice system and in the effectiveness of police forces, we also control for the length of judicial proceedings and for crime-specific clear-up rates, both of which exhibit great variability across provinces. Finally, to further control for unob- served heterogeneity, we include different sets of geographical dummies.
Empirical work on crime and on social capital is typically affected by several methodological problems, the main of which are, besides omitted variables, measurement errors, endogeneity, and spatial correlation. Measured crime rates crucially depend on report rates, which not only vary significantly across crimes and space but, most important, appear to be positively related to social capital. Regressing measured crime rates on social capital, we would thus obtain upward- biased estimates. Endogeneity problems arise from the fact that certain forms of crime might affect social capital because they constrain social interaction, as shown, among others, by Liska and Warner (1991).3 Such a negative effect, due to reverse causation, would bias downward our estimates.4 Spatial correlation may be due to criminals’ interprovince communication or mobility. If ignored, spatial correlation works as an omitted variable, rendering estimates biased and inconsistent.
As far as endogeneity is concerned, we consider blood donations and referenda turnout as safely exogenous variables with respect to crime rates. Indeed, blood donations seem to be as exogenous a variable as possible, and the referenda we consider have never concerned issues either related to crime or of direct interest to criminal groups. To control for the possible endogeneity of association density, we exploit the fact that associational networks in Italy are to a significant extent a historical heritage. We then use Putnam’s (1993) historical data on associations in Italy as an instrument for current associations, arguing that it is unlikely that such an instrument is correlated with current crime rates through other channels.
Measurement errors represent a relevant problem because underreporting, that is, the fraction of crimes that are not reported to the police, is likely to be determined not only by random errors but also by specific and persistent char- acteristics of each province, among which is its level of social capital. High and homogeneous report rates for car thefts offer a first solution to this methodo- logical issue, but we pursue a more general strategy. We “correct” measured crime rates by crime-specific report rates (available from victimization surveys at the regional level), and we thus construct “true” crime rates, which we then regress on their determinants.
Spatial correlation is a crucial issue when evaluating social determinants of crime since, as shown by the recent literature reviewed below, various forms of localized social interaction may give rise to a spatial multiplier (see Anselin et al. 2000) by which crime rates in a given province also depend on crime rates in neighboring provinces. To address this issue, we control for spatially lagged crime rates, which consist of weighted averages of crime rates in neighboring provinces.
(Does Social Capital Reduce Crime?
Paolo Buonanno University of Bergamo Daniel Montolio University of Barcelona Paolo Vanin University of Padua  Jourrnal of Law and Economics, vol. 52 (February 2009)

Thus, social capital is not a homogeneous concept but comprises various social elements that promote individual and collective action. It follows from this definitional complexity that measuring social capital is problematic. Nevertheless, researchers have used --with varying degrees of success-- indicators of social capital based on people’s participation in social organizations, attitudes of civic cooperation, and the sense of trust among community members. No single indicator can embrace the whole spectrum of social capital, but they can jointly approach its complex concept.
There are two basic arguments in favor of a crime-reducing effect of social capital (see Brehm and Rahn 1997, Sampson 1997, and LaFree 1999). The first is that social capital decreases the costs of social transactions, which would then allow for peaceful resolution of conflicts. The second argument is that communities with stronger ties among its members are better equipped to organize themselves to overcome the free-rider problem of collective action. However, there are also reasons to think that social capital may lead to more violent crime (see Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman 1996; and Rubio 1997). In certain contexts, stronger social interactions allow individuals involved in criminal activities to more easily exchange information and know-how that diminish the costs of crime. Furthermore, these social interactions may facilitate the influence of criminals on other community members to develop a propensity for crime and violence. The seemingly opposite effects of social capital on crime may create some confusion. One way to reconcile these two antagonistic effects is to consider that social capital has the potential for inducing more crime and violence when it is specific to particular groups (such as gangs, ethnic clans, and closed neighborhoods) rather than disseminated throughout society. We develop this idea further in the next section of the paper.
The relationship between social capital and crime is even more complex given that the causality between the two may run in both directions -- crime can also affect social capital (Rosenfeld, Messner, and Baumer 1999). The incidence of violent crime may diminish social capital by reducing the sense of trust among community members or may increase it through the formation of community organizations to fight crime. In summary, the relationship between social capital and violence and crime is multifaceted and, therefore, worthy of study.
(VIOLENT CRIME: DOES SOCIAL CAPITAL MATTER?
Daniel Lederman, Norman Loayza, and Ana María Menéndez∗ First draft: July 1999
This draft: July 2000)


